"SPARTA WWW Site"_sws - "SPARTA Documentation"_sd - "SPARTA Commands"_sc :c

:link(sws,http://sparta.sandia.gov)
:link(sd,Manual.html)
:link(sc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

compute tvib/grid command :h3

[Syntax:]

compute ID tvib/grid mix-ID :pre

ID is documented in "compute"_compute.html command
grid = style name of this compute command
mix-ID = mixture ID to perform calculation on :ul

[Examples:]

compute 1 tvib/grid species

[Description:]

Define a computation that calculates the vibrational temperature for
each grid cell, based on the particles in the cell.  A temperature is
calculated for each group of species in the specified mixture.  See
the "mixture"_mixture.html command for how a set of species can be
partitioned into groups.  See the "compute grid"_compute_grid.html
command for other energy and temperature related values that can be
calculated on a per-grid-cell basis.

The results of this compute can be used by different commands in
different ways.  The values for a single timestep can be output by the
"dump grid"_dump.html command.

The values over many sampling timesteps can be averaged by the "fix
ave/grid"_fix_ave_grid.html command.  It does its averaging as if the
particles in the cell at each sampling timestep were combined together
into one large set to compute the formulas below.  The answer is then
divided by the number of sampling timesteps if it is not otherwise
normalized by the number of particles.  Note that this is a different
normalization than taking the values produced by the formulas below
for a single timestep, summing them over the sampling timesteps, and
then dividing by the number of sampling timesteps.

:line

The vibrational temperature for a group of particles comprised of
different species is defined as a weighted average as follows:

T_group = (T1*N1 + T2*N2 + ...) / (N1 + N2 + ...) :pre

The sums in the numerator and denominator are over the different
species in the group.  T1, T2, ... are the vibrational temperatures of
each species.  N1, N2, ... are the counts of particles of each
species.

The vibrational temperature Tsp for a single species is
defined as follows:

Tsp = (2/kB) Sum_i (evib_i) / N (2 Ibar ln(1 + 1/Ibar)) :pre

NOTE: need more doc info here ...

vibstyle option of global command

NOTE: ERASE this next part when done

The {erot} value computes the average rotational energy of particles
in the group:

Erot = Sum_i (erot_i) / N :pre

The {trot} value computes a rotational temperature by the following
formula where {kB} is the Boltzmann factor:

Trot = (2/kB) Sum_i (erot_i) / Sum_i (dof_i) :pre

Dof_i is the number of rotational degrees of freedom for particle i.

The {evib} value computes the average vibrational energy of particles
in the group:

Erot = Sum_i (evib_i) / N :pre

[Output info:]

This compute calculates a per-grid array, with the number of columns
equal to the number of groups in the specified mixture.

This compute performs calculations for all child grid cells in the
simulation, which includes unsplit, split, and sub cells.  "Section
4.8"_Section_howto.html#howto_8 of the manual gives details of how
SPARTA defines child, unsplit, split, and sub cells.  Note that split
cells and unsplit cells inside closed surfaces will contain no
particles.  Thus their computed result for all the individual values
will be 0.0.

The array can be accessed by any command that uses per-grid values
from a compute as input.  See "Section 4.4"_Section_howto.html#howto_4
for an overview of SPARTA output options.

The per-grid array values will be in temperature "units"_units.html.

[Restrictions:] none

[Related commands:]

"compute grid"_compute_grid.html

[Default:] none
