"SPARTA WWW Site"_sws - "SPARTA Documentation"_sd - "SPARTA Commands"_sc :c

:link(sws,http://sparta.sandia.gov)
:link(sd,Manual.html)
:link(sc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

mixture command :h3

[Syntax:]

mixture ID species1 species2 ... keyword args ... :pre

ID = user-defined name of the mixture :ulb,l
species1, species2, ... = zero or more species IDs to include in the mixture :l
zero or more keyword/arg pairs may be appended :l
keyword = {nrho} or {vstream} or {temp} or {frac} or {group} :l
  {nrho} arg = density
    density = number density of entire mixture (# per length^3 units)
  {vstream} args = Vx Vy Vz
    Vx,Vy,Vz = streaming velocity of entire mixture (velocity units)
  {temp} arg = thermal
    thermal = temperature of entire mixture (temperature units)
  {frac} arg = fraction
    fraction = number fraction for each listed species (0 to 1)
  {group} arg = SELF or group-ID
    SELF = put each listed species (or all species if none listed) in its own group
    group-ID = put the listed species (or all species if none listed) in a group with this ID :pre

:ule

[Examples:]

mixture air N O NO group lite
mixture air N O NO vstream 250.0 0.0 0.0 group species
mixture air N frac 0.8
mixture air O frac 0.2
mixture background N O :pre

[Description:]

Define a gas mixture and its properties.  A mixture can be referenced
by its ID in several other SPARTA commands such as
"create_particles"_create_particles.html or "per-grid
computes"_compute.html.  Any number of mixtures can be defined and
used in a simulation.

A mixture is a collection of one or more particle species as defined
by the "species"_species.html command.  Each species belongs to a
named group within the mixture so that particles of all species in the
group can be acted on together by other commands.  The mixture has
global attributes and per-species attributes.  All attributes have
default values unless they are explicitly specified.

The ID for a mixture is used to identify the mixture in other
commands.  Each mixture ID must be unique.  The ID can only contain
alphanumeric characters and underscores.

Note that the mixture command can be used multiple times with the same
ID, to add species to the mixture, define groups within the mixture,
or change its attributes.  Also note that a species can belong to more
than one mixture.

There are 2 default mixtures defined by SPARTA that always exist.

The first default mixture has an ID = "all", and contains all species
that have been defined.  When new species are created via the
"species" command, they are automatically added to this mixture.  This
mixture has only a single group, also named "all", which all species
belong to.

The second default mixture has an ID = "species", and also contains
all species that have been defined.  When new species are created via
the "species" command, they are also automatically added to this
mixture.  This mixture defines one group per species, each with the
species name, so that each species that belongs to its own group.

:line

Zero or more species can be specified in the mixture command.  If a
listed species is not already in the mixture, due to a previous
mixture command with the same ID, then that species is added to the
mixture.  As discussed below, it will be assigned to a default group
and assigned default per-species attributes, unless the appropriate
keywords are also specified.

Species can be specified which are already part of the mixture, to
change their group assignment or their per-species proerties, as
disussed below.

Zero species can be specified, if other keywords are used which alter
group assignments or change global attributes of the mixture, as
discussed below.

:line

The {nrho} keyword sets a global attribute of the mixture, namely its
density.  For 3d simulations the units of the specified {density} are
#/volume.  For 2d, the units are effectively #/area, since the
z-dimension thickness of the simulation box = 1.0.

The {vstream} keyword sets a global attribute of the mixture, namely
the streaming velocity.  Particles created using the mixture will have
the specified {Vx,Vy,Vz} values.

The {temp} keyword sets a global attribute of the mixture, namely the
thermal temperature of its particles.  When particles are created,
this value is used to sample a Gaussian velocity distribution, which
is superposed on the streaming velocity, when a particle's velocity is
initialized.

:line

The {frac} keyword sets a per-species attribute for individual species
in the mixture.  Each species has a relative fractional density, such
as 0.2, meaning one out of 5 particles is that species.  The sum of
this value across all species in the mixture must equal 1.0.  The
{frac} keyword sets this value for the listed species.  If this value
has never been set for M species out of the total N species in the
mixture, then when a simulation is run, the {frac} value for each of
the M species is set to (1 - sum)/M, where sum is the sum of the
{frac} values for the N-M assigned species.

:line

Each species in a mixture is assigned to exactly one group.  The
{group} keyword can be used to set or change these assignments.

As described by the "collide"_collide.html command, mixture groups are
used when performing collisions so that collisions attempts, partners,
and parameters can be treated on a per-group basis for accuracy and
efficiency.  "Per-grid computes"_compute.html also use mixture groups
to calculate per-grid quantities on subsets of particles within each
grid cell.

The specified group ID can be any string you choose.  Similar to the
mixture ID, it can only contain alphanumeric characters and
underscores.  Using SELF for the group ID has a special meaning as
discussed below.

The operation of the {group} keyword depends on whether zero species
or some species are specified explicitly in the mixture command.  It
also depends on whether the group ID is SELF or a user-defined name.
In each case, after the operation is done, any group IDs for the
mixture that have no species assigned to them are deleted.

If zero species are listed and the group ID is SELF, then each species
already in the mixture is assigned to a group with its species ID as
the group ID.  I.e. there will now be one species per group. :ulb,l

If one or more species are listed and the group ID is SELF, then each
listed species is assigned to a group with its species ID as the group
ID. :l

If zero species are listed and the group ID is not SELF, then all
species already in the mixture are assigned to a group with the
specified ID. :l

If one or more species are listed and the group ID is not SELF, then
the listed species are all assigned to a group with the specified
ID. :l,ule

Note that if the {group} keyword is not used, no changes to group
assignements are made.  If one or more new species are specified,
which are not already in the mixture, then each is assigned to a group
with the species ID as the group ID.

:line

[Restrictions:] none

[Related commands:]

"global"_global.html, "create_particles"_create_particles.html

[Default:]

The {nrho}, {vstream}, and {temp} defaults are those defined for the
background gas density, as set by the "global"_global.html command.
The {frac} default is described above.  The {group} keyword has no
default; if it is not used, new species not already in the mixture are
each assigned to a group with the species ID as the group ID.
