"SPARTA WWW Site"_lws - "SPARTA Documentation"_ld - "SPARTA Commands"_lc :c

:link(lws,http://sparta.sandia.gov)
:link(ld,Manual.html)
:link(lc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

package command :h3

[Syntax:]

package style args :pre

style = {kokkos} :ulb,l
args = arguments specific to the style :l
  {kokkos} args = keyword value ...
    zero or more keyword/value pairs may be appended
    keywords = {comm} or {reduction}
      {comm} value = {threaded} or {classic}
        threaded = perform pack/unpack using KOKKOS (e.g. on GPU or using OpenMP) (default)
        classic = perform communication pack/unpack in non-KOKKOS mode
      {reduction} = {parallel/reduce} or {atomic}
        parallel/reduce = use parallel reduction for statistics (default)
        atomic = use atomic reduction for statistics :pre
:ule

[Examples:]

package kokkos comm classic
package kokkos comm threaded reduction atomic :pre

[Description:]

This command invokes package-specific settings for the KOKKOS
accelerator package available in SPARTA.

If this command is specified in an input script, it must be near the
top of the script, before the simulation box has been created.  This
is because it specifies settings that the accelerator package used in
its initialization, before a simulation is defined.

This command can also be specified from the command-line when
launching SPARTA, using the "-pk" "command-line
switch"_Section_start.html#start_6.  The syntax is exactly the same as
when used in an input script.

Note that the KOKKOS accelerator package requires the package command
to be specified, if the package is to be used in a simulation (SPARTA
can be built with the accelerator package without using it in a
particular simulation).  However, a default version of the command is
typically invoked by other accelerator settings. For example, the
KOKKOS package requires a "-k on" "command-line
switch"_Section_start.html#start_6 respectively, which invokes a
"package kokkos" command with default settings.

NOTE: A package command for a particular style can be invoked multiple
times when a simulation is setup, e.g. by the "-k on", "-sf", and
"-pk" "command-line switches"_Section_start.html#start_6, and by using
this command in an input script.  Each time it is used all of the
style options are set, either to default values or to specified
settings.  I.e. settings from previous invocations do not persist
across multiple invocations.

See the the "Accelerating SPARTA"_Section_accelerate.html#acc_3
section of the manual for more details about using the various
accelerator packages for speeding up SPARTA simulations.

:line

The {kokkos} style invokes settings associated with the use of the
KOKKOS package.

All of the settings are optional keyword/value pairs.  Each has a
default value as listed below.

The {reduction} keyword sets the type of reduction used to gather
statistics. The {parallel/reduce} option uses a parallel reduction and
is typically the preferred method when running on CPUs and Xeon Phis.
The {atomic} option uses thread atomics and is typically faster when
running on GPUs.

The {comm} keyword determines whether the host or device performs the
packing and unpacking of data when communicating per-atom data between
processors. The value options are {threaded} or {classic}.

The optimal choice for this keyword depends on the hardware used.
When running on CPUs or Xeon Phi, the {classic} option is typically
fastest. When using GPUs, the {threaded} value will typically be
optimal. In this case data can stay on the GPU for many timesteps
without being moved between the host and GPU.  This requires that your
MPI is able to access GPU memory directly.  Currently that is true for
OpenMPI 1.8 (or later versions), Mvapich2 1.9 (or later), and CrayMPI.

:line

[Restrictions:]

This command cannot be used after the simulation box is defined by a
"create_box"_create_box.html command.

The kk style of this command can only be invoked if SPARTA was built
with the KOKKOS package.  See the "Making
SPARTA"_Section_start.html#start_3 section for more info.

[Related commands:]

"suffix"_suffix.html, "-pk" "command-line
setting"_Section_start.html#start_6

[Default:]

For the KOKKOS package, the option defaults are comm = threaded, and
reduction = parallel/reduce.  These settings are made automatically by
the required "-k on" "command-line switch"_Section_start.html#start_6.
You can change them by using the package kokkos command in your input
script or via the "-pk kokkos" "command-line
switch"_Section_start.html#start_6.
