"SPARTA WWW Site"_sws - "SPARTA Documentation"_sd - "SPARTA Commands"_sc :c

:link(sws,http://sparta.sandia.gov)
:link(sd,Manual.html)
:link(sc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

read_restart command :h3

[Syntax:]

read_restart file :pre

file = name of binary restart file to read in :ul

[Examples:]

read_restart save.10000
read_restart restart.*
read_restart flow.*.% :pre

[Description:]

Read in a previously saved simulation from a restart file.  This
allows continuation of a previous run on the same or different number
of processors.  Information about what is stored in a restart file is
given below.  Basically this operation will re-create the simulation
box with all its particles, the hierarchical grid used to track
particles, and surface elements embedded in the grid, all with their
attributes at the point in time the information was written to the
restart file by a previous simluation.

Although restart files are saved in binary format to allow exact
regeneration of information, the random numbers used in the continued
run will not be identical to those used if the run had been continued.
Hence the new run will not be identical to the continued original run,
but should be statistically similar.

IMPORTANT NOTE: Because restart files are binary, they may not be
portable to other machines.  SPARTA will print an error message if
this is the case.

If a restarted run is performed on the same number of processors as
the original run, then the assignment of grid cells (and their
particles) to processors will be the same as in the original
simulation.  If the processor count changes, then the assignment will
necessarily be different.  In particular, even if the original
assignment was "clumped", meaning each processor's cells were
geometrically compact, the new assignment will not be, but will be
"dispersed".

IMPORTANT NOTE: See "Section 5.8"_Section_howto.html#howto_8 of the
manual for an explanation of clumped and dispersed grid cell
assignments and their relative performance trade-offs.  The
"balance_grid"_balance_grid.html command can be used after the restart
file is read, to assign child cells to processors in different ways.
The "fix balance" command can be used to re-assign them in a
load-balanced manner periodically during a running simulation.

IMPORTANT NOTE: As explained below, the restart file contains the
setting for the "global gridcut"_global.html command.  If you restart
on a different number of processors, and the gridcut setting from the
original script is >= 0.0, then SPARTA will be unable to generate
ghost cell information when setting up the grid.  This is because the
assignment of grid cells to processors will not be clumped.  This will
generate an error when a simulation is performed.  The solution is to
use the "balance_grid"_balance_grid.html command after reading the
restart file.  Optionally, the "global gridcut"_global.html command
can be used before the "balance_grid"_balance_grid.html command, to
change the cutoff setting.  If the cutoff is set to -1.0, then the
"balance_grid none"_balance_grid.html command can be used, which will
not change the grid cell assignments, but will generate the needed
ghost cell information.

:line

Similar to how restart files are written (see the
"write_restart"_write_restart.html and "restart"_restart.html
commands), the restart filename can contain two wild-card characters.
If a "*" appears in the filename, the directory is searched for all
filenames that match the pattern where "*" is replaced with a timestep
value.  The file with the largest timestep value is read in.  Thus,
this effectively means, read the latest restart file.  It's useful if
you want your script to continue a run from where it left off.  See
the "run"_run.html command and its "upto" option for how to specify
the run command so it doesn't need to be changed either.

If a "%" character appears in the restart filename, SPARTA expects a
set of multiple files to exist.  The "restart"_restart.html and
"write_restart"_write_restart.html commands explain how such sets are
created.  Read_restart will first read a filename where "%" is
replaced by "base".  This file tells SPARTA how many processors
created the set and how many files are in it.  Read_restart then reads
the additional files.  For example, if the restart file was specified
as save.% when it was written, then read_restart reads the files
save.base, save.0, save.1, ... save.P-1, where P is the number of
processors that created the restart file.

Note that P could be the total number of processors in the previous
simulation, or some subset of those processors, if the {fileper} or
{nfile} options were used when the restart file was written; see the
"restart"_restart.html and "write_restart"_write_restart.html commands
for details.  The processors in the current SPARTA simulation share
the work of reading these files; each reads a roughly equal subset of
the files.  The number of processors which created the set can be
different the number of processors in the current SPARTA simulation.
This can be a fast mode of input on parallel machines that support
parallel I/O.

:line

A restart file stores only the following information about a
simulation:

units
simulation box size and boundary conditions
all settings of the global command
particles with their individual attributes
particle species info
mixtures
geometry of the hierarchical grid that overlays the simulation domain
geometry of all derined surface elements
current timestep number :ul

Basically, this means the information from the original input script
specified by these commands is saved in the restart file:

"units"_units.html
"dimension"_dimension.html
"create_box"_create_box.html
"boundary"_boundary.html
"species"_species.html
"mixture"_mixture.html
"create_grid"_create_grid.html or "read_grid"_read_grid.html
"read_surf"_read_surf.html :ul

No other information is stored in the restart file.  Specifically,
information about these simulation parameters is NOT stored:

computes
fixes
collision model
chemistry (reaction) model
surface collision models
variables
regions
output options for stats, dump, restart files
timestep size :ul

Basically, this means any information specified in the original input
script by these commands needs to be re-specified in the restart input
script, assuming the continued simulation needs the information:

"compute"_compute.html
"fix"_fix.html
"collide"_collide.html
"react"_react.html
"surf_collide"_surf_collide.html
"surf_modify"_surf_modify.html
"variable"_variable.html
"region"_region.html
"stats_style"_stats_style.html
"dump"_dump.html
"restart"_restart.html
"timestep"_timestep.html :ul

In particular, take note of these issues:

The status of time-averaging fixes, such as "fix
ave/time"_fix_ave_time.html, "fix ave/grid"_fix_ave_grid.html, "fix
ave/surf"_fix_ave_surf.html, does not carry over into the restarted
run.  E.g. if the {ave running} option is used with those commands in
the original script and again specified in the restart script, the
running averaged quantities do not persist into the new run. :ulb,l

The "surf_modify"_surf_modify.html command must be used in the restart
script to assign surface collision models, specified by the
"surf_collide"_surf_collide.html command, to all "global
boundaries"_boundary.html of type "s", and to any surfaces contained
in the restart file.  The latter would have been setup in the original
script via the "read_surf"_read_surf.html command. :l

Even if a collision model is specified in the restart script, and the
"collide_modify vremax or remain"_collide_modify.html command is used
to enable Vremax and fractional collision count to persist for many
timesteps, no information about these quantities persists from the
original simulation to the restarted simulation.  The initial run in
the restart script will re-initialize these data structures. :ule,l

Also note that many commands can be used after a restart file is read,
to re-specify a setting that was stored in the restart file.  file is
read.  For example, the "global"_global.html command can be used to
reset the values of its specified keywords.

:line

[Restrictions:] none

[Related commands:]

"read_grid"_read_grid.html, "read_surf"_read_surf.html,
"write_restart"_write_restart.html, "restart"_restart.html

[Default:] none
