"SPARTA WWW Site"_sws - "SPARTA Documentation"_sd - "SPARTA Commands"_sc :c

:link(sws,http://sparta.sandia.gov)
:link(sd,Manual.html)
:link(sc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

surf_collide command :h3

[Syntax:]

surf_collide ID style args keyword values ... :pre

ID = user-assigned name for the surface collision model :ulb,l
style = {specular} or {diffuse} or {cll} or {piston} or {vanish} :l
args = arguments for specific style :l
  {specular} args = none
  {diffuse} args = Tsurf acc
    Tsurf = temperature of surface (temperature units)
            Tsurf can be a variable (see below)
    acc = accommodation coefficient
  {cll} args = Tsurf acc_n acc_t acc_rot acc_vib
    Tsurf = temperature of surface (temperature units)
            Tsurf can be a variable (see below)
    acc_n = accommodation coefficient in the surface normal direction
    acc_t = accommodation coefficient in the surface tangential direction
    acc_rot = accommodation coefficient for the rotational modes
    acc_vib = accommodation coefficient for the vibrational modes
  {piston} args = Vwall
    Vwall = velocity of boundary wall (velocity units)
  {vanish} args = none 
  {specular/kk} args = none
  {diffuse/kk} args = Tsurf acc
    Tsurf = temperature of surface (temperature units)
            Tsurf can be a variable (see below)
    acc = accommodation coefficient
  {piston/kk} args = Vwall
    Vwall = velocity of boundary wall (velocity units)
  {vanish/kk} args = none :pre
zero or more keyword/arg pairs may be appended :l
keyword = {translate} or {rotate} or {partial} :l
values = values for specific keyword :l
  {translate} args = Vx Vy Vz
    Vx,Vy,Vz = translational velocity of surface (velocity units)
  {rotate} args = Pz Py Pz Wx Wy Wz
    Px,Py,Pz = point to rotate surface around (distance units)
    Wx,Wy,Wz = angular velocity of surface around point (radians/time) 
  {partial} args = eccen (only for the {cll} model)
    eccen = eccentricity parameter :pre
:ule
  

[Examples:]

surf_collide 1 specular
surf_collide 1 diffuse 273.15 0.9
surf_collide 1 cll 273.15 0.8 0.8 0.5 0.1
surf_collide 1 cll 273.15 1.0 1.0 0.1 0.1 partial 0.5
surf_collide heatwall diffuse v_ramp 0.8
surf_collide heatwall diffuse v_ramp 0.8 translate 5.0 0.0 0.0 :pre

[Description:]

Define a model for particle-surface collisions.  One or more models
can be defined and assigned to different surfaces or simulation box
boundaries via the "surf_modify"_surf_modify.html or
"bound_modify"_bound_modify.html commands.  See "Section
4.9"_Section_howto.html#howto_9 for more details of how SPARTA defines
surfaces as collections of geometric elements, triangles in 3d and
line segments in 2d.

The ID for a surface collision model is used to identify it in other
commands.  Each surface collision model ID must be unique.  The ID can
only contain alphanumeric characters and underscores.

:line

The {specular} style computes a simple specular reflection model.  It
requires no arguments.  Specular reflection means that a particle
reflects off a surface element with its incident velocity vector
reversed with respect to the outward normal of the surface element.
The particle's speed is unchanged.

:line

The {diffuse} style computes a simple diffusive reflection model.

The model has 2 parameters set by the {Tsurf} and {acc} arguments.
{Tsurf} is the temperature of the surface.  {Acc} is an accommodation
coefficient from 0.0 to 1.0, which determines what fraction of surface
collisions are specular.  The rest are diffusive.  Thus a setting of
{acc} = 0.0 means all collisions are specular.

Note that setting {acc} = 0.0, is a way to perform surface reactions
with specular reflection, via the "surf_react"_surf_react.html
command, which cannot be done in conjunction with the surf_collide
specular command.  See the "surf_react"_surf_react.html doc page for
details.

Diffuse reflection emits the particle from the surface with no
dependence on its incident velocity.  A new velocity is assigned to
the particle, sampled from a Gaussian distribution consistent with the
surface temperature.  The new velocity will have thermal components in
the direction of the outward surface normal and the plane tangent to
the surface given by:

:c,image(Eqs/diffuse_normal.jpg)

The {Tsurf} value can be specified as an equal-style
"variable"_variable.html.  If the value is a variable, it should be
specified as v_name, where name is the variable name.  In this case,
the variable will be evaluated each timestep, and its value used to
determine the current surface temperature.

Equal-style variables can specify formulas with various mathematical
functions, and include "stats_style"_status_style.html command
keywords for the simulation box parameters and timestep and elapsed
time.  Thus it is easy to specify a time-dependent temperature.

:line

The {cll} style computes the surface collision model proposed by Cercignani, Lampis and Lord. The model has 5 parameters set by the {Tsurf}, {acc_n}, {acc_t}, {acc_rot}, and {acc_vib} arguments. {Tsurf} is the temperature of the surface.  {acc_n}, {acc_t}, {acc_rot}, and {acc_vib} are the accommodation coefficient for the surface normal direction, surface tangential directions, rotational energy mode, and vibrational energy mode respectively. The rotational and vibrational energy accommodation values must be specified even for an atomic species; however these values are simply ignored.

The theoretical scattering kernel was proposed by Cercignani and Lampis "(Cercignani71)"_#Cercignani71. In this original model, two accommodation coefficients for the normal and tangential directions are employed. Each of these quantities can take a value between 0 and 1. Specular reflection is achieved by using the values (0,0), while complete thermal accommodation with the surface and cosine angular distributions is obtained using (1,1). There is smooth variation of both the energy and angular distribution for values in between these limits leading to lobular distributions similar to those observed in experiments. 
The implementation details of this model within DSMC was given by Lord "(Lord90)"_#Lord90, along with extension to rotational and vibrational modes with both continuous and discrete levels "(Lord91)"_#Lord91.      

The {Tsurf} value can be specified as an equal-style "variable"_variable.html.  If the value is a variable, it should be specified as v_name, where name is the variable name.  In this case, the variable will be evaluated each timestep, and its value used to determine the current surface temperature.

Equal-style variables can specify formulas with various mathematical functions and include "stats_style"_status_style.html command keywords for the simulation box parameters and timestep and elapsed time.  Thus, it is easy to specify a time-dependent temperature.

:line

The {piston} style models a subsonic pressure boundary condition.  It
can only be assigned to the simulation box boundaries via the
"bound_modify"_bound_modify.html command or to surface elements which
are parallel to one of the box boundaries (via the
"surf_modify"_surf_modify.html command).

It treats collisions of particles with the surface as if the surface
were moving with specified velocity {Vwall} away from the incident
particle.  Thus the "collision" actually occurs later in the timestep
and the reflected velocity is less than it would be for reflection
from a stationary surface.  This calculation is performed using
equations 12.30 and 12.31 in "(Bird94)"_#Bird94) to compute the
reflected velocity and final position of the particle.  If the
particle does not return within the timestep to a position inside the
simulation box (for a boundary surface) or to the same side of the
initial surface that it started from (for a surface element
collision), the particle is deleted.  This effectively induces
particles at the boundary to have a velocity distribution consistent
with a subsonic pressure boundary condition, as explained in
"(Bird94)"_#Bird94).

{Vwall} should be chosen to correspond to a desired pressure condition
for the density of particles in the system.

NOTE: explain how to do this?

Note that {Vwall} must always be input as a value >= 0.0, meaning the
surface is moving away from the incident particle.  For example, in
the z-dimension, if the upper box face is assigned {Vwall}, it is
moving upward.  Similarly if the lower box face is assigned {Vwall},
it is moving downward.

:line

The {vanish} style simply deletes any particle which hits the surface.

This is useful if a surface is defined to be an inflow boundary on the
simulation domain, e.g. using the "fix emit/surf"_fix_emit_surf.html
command.  Using this surface collision model will also treat the
surface as an outflow boundary.  This is similar to using the "fix
emit/face"_fix_emit_face.html command on a simulation box face while
also setting the face to be an outflow boundary via the "boundary
o"_boundary.html command.

Note that the "surf_react global"_surf_react.html command can also be
used to delete particles hitting a surface, by setting the {pdelete}
parameter to 1.0.  Using a surf_collide vanish command is simpler.

:line

The keyword {translate} can only be applied to the {diffuse} and {cll} style.
It models the surface as if it were translating with a constant
velocity, specified by the vector (Vx,Vy,Vz).  This velocity is added
to the final post-collisional velocity of each particle that collides
with the surface.

The keyword {rotate} can only be applied to the {diffuse} and {cll} style.  It
models the surface as if it were rotating with a constant angular
velocity, specified by the vector W = (Wx,Wy,Wz), around the specified
point P = (Px,Py,Pz).  Note that W and P define the rotation axis.
The magnitude of W defines the speed of rotation.  I.e. if the length
of W = 2*pi then the surface is rotating at one revolution per time
unit, where time units are defined by the "units"_units.html command.

When a particle collides with the surface at a point X = (x,y,z), the
collision point has a velocity given by V = (Vx,Vy,Vz) = W cross
(X-P).  This velocity is added to the final post-collisional velocity
of the particle.

The {rotate} keyword can be used to treat a simulation box boundary as
a rotating wall, e.g. the end cap of an axisymmetric cylinder.  Or to
model a rotating object consisting of surface elements, e.g. a sphere.
In either case, the wall or surface elements themselves do not change
position due to rotation.  They are simply modeled as having a
tangential velocity, as if the entire object were rotating.

IMPORTANT NOTE: For both the {translate} and {rotate} keywords the
added velocity can only be tangential to the surface, with no normal
component since the surface is not actually moving in the normal
direction.  SPARTA does not check that the specified translation or
rotation produces a tangential velocity.  However if does enforce the
condition by subtracting off any component of the added velocity that
is normal to the simulation box boundary or individual surface
element.

The keyword {partial} can only be applied to the {cll} style. Within the CLL model, the energy and angular distribution are linked. Lord "(Lord95)"_#Lord95 proposed a way to decouple the energy accommodation from the angular distribution. This case of partially diffuse scattering with incomplete energy accommodation can be activated in SPARTA using the optional keyword {partial}. It requires an additional parameter eccentricity set by the {eccen} argument. For this case, the energy accommodation is calculated using the accommodation coefficients, but the angular distribution is computed using the additional parameter eccentricity. The {eccen} parameter can vary between 0 and 1. A value of 0 represents fully diffuse scattering and gives a cosine angular distribution. Increasing value of {eccen} presents more peaked and lobular distribution "(Lord95)"_#Lord95. 

:line

[Output info:]

All the surface collide models calculate a global vector of length 2.
The values can be used by the "stats_style"_stats_style.html command
and by "variables"_variable.html that define formulas.  The latter
means they can be used by any command that uses a variable as input,
e.g. the "fix ave/time"_fix_ave_time.html command.  See "Section
4.4"_Section_howto.html#howto_4 for an overview of SPARTA output
options.

The first element of the vector is the count of particles that hit
surface elements assigned to this collision model during the current
timestep.  The second element is the cummulative count of particles
that have hit surface elements since the current run began.

:line

Styles with a {kk} suffix are functionally the same as the
corresponding style without the suffix.  They have been optimized to
run faster, depending on your available hardware, as discussed in the
"Accelerating SPARTA"_Section_accelerate.html section of the manual.
The accelerated styles take the same arguments and should produce the
same results, except for different random number, round-off and
precision issues.

These accelerated styles are part of the KOKKOS package. They are only
enabled if SPARTA was built with that package.  See the "Making
SPARTA"_Section_start.html#start_3 section for more info.

You can specify the accelerated styles explicitly in your input script
by including their suffix, or you can use the "-suffix command-line
switch"_Section_start.html#start_6 when you invoke SPARTA, or you can
use the "suffix"_suffix.html command in your input script.

See the "Accelerating SPARTA"_Section_accelerate.html section of the
manual for more instructions on how to use the accelerated styles
effectively.

:line

[Restrictions:]

The {translate} and {rotate} keywords cannot be used together.

If specified with a {kk} suffix, this command can be used no more than
twice in the same input script (active at the same time).

[Related commands:]

"read_surf"_read_surf.html, "bound_modify"_bound_modify.html

[Default:] none

:line

:link(Bird94)
[(Bird94)] G. A. Bird, Molecular Gas Dynamics and the Direct
Simulation of Gas Flows, Clarendon Press, Oxford (1994).

:link(Cercignani71)
[(Cercignani71)] Cercignani C, Lampis M, Kinetic models for gas-surface interactions, Transport theory and statistical physics, Jan (1971).

:link(Lord90)
[(Lord90)] R. G. Lord, presented at the 17th International Symposium on Rarefied Gas Dynamics, Germany, July (1990).

:link(Lord91)
[(Lord91)] R. G. Lord, Some extensions of the Cercignani-Lampis gas-surface interaction model, Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics, Jan (1991).

:link(Lord95)
[(Lord95)] R. G. Lord, Some further extensions of the Cercignani-Lampis gas-surface interaction model, Physics of Fluids, May (1995).

