"SPARTA WWW Site"_sws - "SPARTA Documentation"_sd - "SPARTA Commands"_sc :c

:link(sws,http://sparta.sandia.gov)
:link(sd,Manual.html)
:link(sc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

write_surf command :h3

[Syntax:]

write_surf file :pre

file = name of file to write surface element info to :ulb,l
zero or more keyword/args pairs may be appended :l
keyword = {points} :l
  points args = {yes} or {no} to include a Points section in the file :pre
:ule

[Examples:]

write_surf data.surf :pre

[Description:]

Write a surface file in text format describing the currently defined
surface elements.  See the "read_surf"_read_surf.html command for a
definition of surface elements and how they are defined and used be
SPARTA.  The surface file can be used for later input to a new
simulation or for post-processing and visualization.

Note that if surface objects were clipped when read in by the
"read_surf"_read_surf.html command then some surface elements may have
been deleted and new ones created.  Likewise for the points that
define the end points or corner points of surface element lines (2d)
or triangles (3d).  Similarly, if surface elements have been removed
by the "remove_surf"_remove_surf.html command, then points may have
also been deleted.  In either case, surface points and elements are
renumbered by these operations to create compressed, contiguous lists.
These lists are what is output by this command.

The file is written as a text file in the same format as the
"read_surf"_read_surf.html command reads in.  Note that a Points
section is optional.  If the {points} keyword is specified with a
value of {yes}, then a Points section is included in the file.  If the
value is {no}, then point coordinates are included with individual
lines or triangles.

[Restrictions:] none

[Related commands:]

"read_surf"_read_surf.html

[Default:]

The default is points = yes.

